README.md, before:

# SMS Checker / Backend

The backend of this project provides a simple REST service that can be used to detect spam messages.
We have extended the base project [rohan8594/SMS-Spam-Detection](https://github.com/rohan8594/SMS-Spam-Detection), which introduces several basic classification models, and wrap one of them in a microservice.

The following sections will explain you how to get started.
The project **requires a Python 3.12 environment** to run (tested with 3.12.9).
Use the `requirements.txt` file to restore the required dependencies in your environment.


### Training the Model

To train the model, you have two options.
Either you create a local environment...

    $ python -m venv venv
    $ source venv/bin/activate
    $ pip install -r requirements.txt

... or you train in a Docker container (recommended):

    $ docker run -it --rm -v ./:/root/sms/ python:3.12.9-slim bash
    ... (container startup)
    $ cd /root/sms/
    $ pip install -r requirements.txt

Once all dependencies have been installed, the data can be preprocessed and the model trained by creating the output folder and invoking three commands:

    $ mkdir output
    $ python src/read_data.py
    Total number of messages:5574
    ...
    $ python src/text_preprocessing.py
    [nltk_data] Downloading package stopwords to /root/nltk_data...
    [nltk_data]   Unzipping corpora/stopwords.zip.
    ...
    $ python src/text_classification.py

The resulting model files will be placed as `.joblib` files in the `output/` folder.


### Serving Recommendations

To make the models accessible, you need to start the microservice by running the `src/serve_model.py` script from within the virtual environment that you created before, or in a fresh Docker container (recommended):

    $ docker run -it --rm -p 8081:8081 -v ./:/root/sms/ python:3.12.9-slim bash
    ... (container startup)
    $ cd /root/sms/
    $ pip install -r requirements.txt
    $ python src/serve_model.py

The server will start on port 8081.
Once its startup has finished, you can either access [localhost:8081/apidocs](http://localhost:8081/apidocs) in your browser to interact with the service, or you send `POST` requests to request predictions, for example with `curl`:


    $ curl -X POST "http://localhost:8081/predict" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"sms": "test ..."}'
    {
      "classifier": "decision tree",
      "result": "ham",
      "sms": "test ..."
    }

Commit message:

F10: No hard-coded model in `model-service`.
The model version is taken from the environment. The service will download the specified version of the model if it is not found on startup.

README.md, after:

# SMS Checker / Backend

The backend of this project provides a simple REST service that can be used to detect spam messages.
We have extended the base project [rohan8594/SMS-Spam-Detection](https://github.com/rohan8594/SMS-Spam-Detection), which introduces several basic classification models, and wrap one of them in a microservice.

The following sections will explain you how to get started.
The project **requires a Python 3.12 environment** to run (tested with 3.12.9).
Use the `requirements.txt` file to restore the required dependencies in your environment.


### Training the Model

To train the model, you have two options.
Either you create a local environment...

    $ python -m venv venv
    $ source venv/bin/activate
    $ pip install -r requirements.txt

... or you train in a Docker container (recommended):

    $ docker run -it --rm -v ./:/root/sms/ python:3.12.9-slim bash
    ... (container startup)
    $ cd /root/sms/
    $ pip install -r requirements.txt

Once all dependencies have been installed, the data can be preprocessed and the model trained by creating the output folder and invoking three commands:

    $ mkdir output
    $ python src/read_data.py
    Total number of messages:5574
    ...
    $ python src/text_preprocessing.py
    [nltk_data] Downloading package stopwords to /root/nltk_data...
    [nltk_data]   Unzipping corpora/stopwords.zip.
    ...
    $ python src/text_classification.py

The resulting model files will be placed as `.joblib` files in the `output/` folder.


### Serving Recommendations

To make the models accessible, you need to start the microservice by running the `src/serve_model.py` script from within the virtual environment that you created before, or in a fresh Docker container (recommended).

The following environment variables are expected:
- `MODEL_VERSION` - which model version to use (e.g. `0.0.1`, must match a GitHub release created by the training workflow)
- `MODEL_BASE_URL` - base URL of the releases (e.g. `https://github.com/doda25-team1/model-service/releases/download`)

How to run in a Docker container (recommended):

    $ docker run -it --rm \
        -p 8081:8081 \
        -e MODEL_VERSION=0.0.1 \
        -e MODEL_BASE_URL=https://github.com/doda25-team1/model-service/releases/download \
        -v ./:/root/sms/ \
        python:3.12.9-slim bash
    ... (container startup)
    $ cd /root/sms/
    $ pip install -r requirements.txt
    $ mkdir -p output
    $ python src/serve_model.py

The server will start on port 8081.
Once its startup has finished, you can either access [localhost:8081/apidocs](http://localhost:8081/apidocs) in your browser to interact with the service, or you send `POST` requests to request predictions, for example with `curl`:


    $ curl -X POST "http://localhost:8081/predict" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"sms": "test ..."}'
    {
      "classifier": "decision tree",
      "result": "ham",
      "sms": "test ..."
    }

> The model files are not baked into the image. Instead, the container uses a mounted directory as a local cache and will download the specified model into it if needed.
